_Version: 5.0.0-SNAPSHOT_

# 2. Overview

* * *

## <a name="2.1"></a>2.1 What is a Portlet Bridge?

The Java&trade; Portlet Specification defines a set of APIs for directly implementing a portlet. A portlet bridge is a
technology used by a portlet to "bridge" to an execution environment where differing abstractions are used for rendering
markup or processing user interactions. Typically these are well-known, possibly standard web development environments.
Examples include JavaServer&trade; Faces and Apache Struts.

The portlet bridge acts as the translation engine between the portlet environment and the targeted system. It expresses
the portlet request context to the bridged environment, executes the request and transforms the response as appropriate
for the portlet environment. It provides an abstraction of the portlet environment for the bridged environment, and for
developers working within the bridged environment. These developers are freed to execute JSF views as portlets, without
the need to understand the details of the portlet APIs and development model.

To put it simply, a portlet bridge is the technology that allows a Java web developer to execute views developed using
other web programming abstractions as portlets without needing to know and or learn about portlet development, concepts,
or APIs.

The Portlet Bridge for JavaServer&trade; Faces is the specific bridge technology needed to support this bridging
behavior for JavaServer&trade; Faces.

## <a name="2.2"></a>2.2 What is a Portlet?

A portlet is a Java&trade; module that executes within a portlet container that implements the [Portlet 3.0
Specification](https://www.jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=362). Similar to a servlet-based web application (webapp), a portlet
has the ability to process incoming requests and write to an associated response. Whereas the Servlet API provides
simple ServletRequest/ServletResponse pattern, the Portlet API provides multiple types of requests and responses. In
addition, the Portlet Specification requires that portlet containers execute individual portlets within the context of
the **portlet lifecycle** (which often spans multiple requests).

The output of a webapp is typically the content of an individual resource or a complete HTML document. Although portlets
have a similar ability to output the content of an individual resource, they are not permitted to output a complete HTML
document. Instead, portlets contribute HTML fragments that are aggregated by the portlet container into a complete HTML
document (also known as a portal page).

## <a name="2.3"></a>2.3 What is JavaServer&trade; Faces

JavaServer&trade; Faces (JSF) is the Java EE standard web application framework and implements the Model-View-Controller
(MVC) design pattern. Unlike action-based MVC frameworks like Apache Struts, JSF implements component-based MVC.

JSF provides the Facelets templating language for authoring page views. Using a declarative syntax, developers use
Facelet component tags to describe the user interface components that are to be executed and rendered within the context
of the **JSF lifecycle**.

## <a name="2.4"></a>2.4 Architectural Overview

One of the main functions of the Faces Bridge is to connect the portlet lifecycle to the JSF lifecycle so that JSF views
can execute and produce fragments of markup that contribute to the overall markup of the portal page.

The following diagram illustrates the architecture of a Java Portlet Application using the portlet bridge to execute JSF
pages as the means of generating portlet fragments.

![Java Portlet Application Architectural Diagram Depicting use of Faces Bridge](../resources/images/architectural-overview.png)

This diagram shows two entry points to the portlet web application. The entry point depicted on the right (Client WebApp
Request) models the usual execution of a Faces application. The client makes a direct (browser/http) request to the web
application to execute/present a Faces page. The FacesServlet receives this request and executes the targeted page.

The entry point depicted on the left (Client Portal Request) models the execution of the Faces application when it is
accessed via a portlet running in the portlet container. In this case, the client sends its request to the consumer
(portal) web application, which resolves the request to one of its pages, containing in part one or more portlets. The
consumer portal executes a page engine that aggregates markup retrieved by multiple portlets defined within the portal
page. The consumer portal executes and renders the aggregated portlet by making requests to the portlet containers that
host the portlets. This request is modeled by the central arrow in the diagram. The portlet container resolves the
consumer portal's request and executes the targeted portlet according to the Java Portlet 2.0 APIs/specification.

For each portlet whose behavior is implemented using the Faces technology, the portlet activates and executes its own
instance of the bridge by using the APIs defined in this specification. The bridge provides the intermediate that
translates between portlet and JSF semantics. The portlet container and the Faces engine are loosely coupled through the
portlet bridge - neither the portlet container, nor the Faces engine, is aware of the other.

For each request directed through the portlet bridge, the Faces environment is initialized, the Faces lifecycle is
executed, and the targeted Faces page/view is processed/rendered. A component of the portlet bridge acts as a Faces
controller, much as the FacesServlet does in the case of a direct client request.

The end result is a portlet web application that presents one or more Faces page collections (distinct grouping of pages
that might otherwise be represented as discrete applications) to the user as a portlet contained in another
application's page. These two channels into the application can be serviced concurrently.

## <a name="2.5"></a>2.5 Terminology

As this specification draws heavily on the concepts in the Portlet specification and the JavaServer Faces specification
many of the terms used in those specifications are used here. However, there can sometimes be subtle differences in the
usage of these terms.

**request:** a call made from the client to the server to process some information or render some markup.

**response:** the reply from the server to a *request*.

**consumer:** a (web) application whose UI/pages are represented in part by portlet components. A typical consumer
application is a portal. A portal aggregates portlets in a portal page.

**container:** the core server subsystem that receives incoming requests and processes them. The two containers of
interest are the servlet container and the portlet container. The portlet container is the container that processes
requests targeted to portlets. The servlet container is the container that processes requests targeted to servlets. A
Faces application expects to run equally well in both containers. However, the servlet container is the dominant
container. Much of the Faces model relies on the servlet abstractions. Where the portlet abstraction differs, executing
Faces in the portlet container is often undefined. Its the role of the bridge to define this behavior and ensure Faces
executes as it expects.

**portlet request:** a call from the client (portal consumer) to a portlet container in order to process some
information or render some markup. The portlet container executes the targeted portlet to process the request. There
are two things that distinguish portlet requests from typical http (web requests): the client sending the portlet
request is a consumer (portal) application not an end user (browser) and multiple (two) requests are sent to submit
data and render a markup response. Within this specification *portlet request* is often shortened to *request*.

**action request:** a *portlet request* to process a user interaction.

**header request:** a *portlet request* to generate and capture markup for the portal's `<head>` section based on the
*current portlet state.

**render request:** a *portlet request* to write captured markup to the response.

**portlet response:** the reply generated by the portlet to a portlet request. Responses differ between an *action
request* and a *render request*.

**action response:** a portlet's reply to an action request. This reply does not contain markup. It can contain new
portlet state that is managed by the client and returned in subsequent calls.

**header response:** a portlet's reply to a header request. Writing to the header response causes the consumer (portal)
to add the written markup to the `<head>` section of the page. Calling the `addDependency(...)` methods on the header
response can also cause markup to be written to the `<head>` section of the page. HTTP headers, cookies, and properties
can also be set on the header response. As the portlet model assumes many renders of the portlet's headers may occur
after an action has been processed, rendering the portlet's headers is expected to be idempotent. Portlets are
discouraged from changing state during a header request. Instead they merely render from their existing internal state
and that supplied in the request from the consumer (portal).

**render response:** a portlet's reply to a render request. This is the markup response.

**request scope:** the duration of a request being processed by the server. Typically, the container in the server
responsible for handing the particular type of request provides its clients with an ability to attach state to this
scope.

**portlet request scope:** the duration of a request processed by the portlet container. Because portlets separate
action processing and rendering in two distinct requests, client state stored in the request scope does not carry
forward from a portlet's action to its header phase.

**servlet request scope:** the duration of a request processed by the servlet container. Because the servlet container
processes http requests, all action processing and rendering occurs within a single request.

**Faces request scope:** the duration of a request processed by Faces. As Faces executes in the context of an underlying
container its request scope is restricted by that provided by the container. However, the Faces model is based on the
servlet model and hence expects a single request for processing both user interactions and rendering. Because this
isn't the behavior in a portlet container, Faces does not execute properly if the Faces application depends on request
scoped data established during action processing and referenced during rendering. As this is typical, one of the main
responsibilities of the bridge is ensuring the expected semantics of the Faces request scope even though it is running
in the portlet environment.

**bridge request scope:** (managed request scope is a synonym also used by this specification): The duration in which
the bridge manages request scoped data in order to provide the expected Faces request scope in a portlet container. To
provide the expected Faces semantics in a portlet environment the bridge preserves data stored at request scope so that
it can be restored on subsequent header requests. I.e. where in a regular portlet environment, each action, header, and
render request processing starts with an empty data set in its request scope and any data added to this scope during
processing is destroyed when the request completes, the bridge preserves this state and restores it into the request
scope on subsequent header requests. Unlike the request scope, Faces (and clients of Faces) don't interact directly
with the bridge request scope. Rather it is a term used by this specification to describe the function provided by the
bridge which retains and restores such data between portlet requests.

**view:** This is a Faces term that describes the tree of user interface components and their state which when executed
(rendered) generate the markup response.

**viewId:** This is a Faces term for the identifier that identifies a particular Faces view. The viewId is used to
resolve which view should be activated and used to process this request.

**view state:** At the end of a request (lifecycle), Faces saves and releases the current view to minimize memory usage.
The view state is a saved view. Conceptually the view state contains two parts: the component structure (otherwise
known as the tree structure) and the state of each component.

**view state parameter:** This is a Faces term for the request parameter that contains the identifier for the view
state. The value of the view state parameter is used to identify the corresponding state that should be restored for
the view targeted by the request.

**application initialization parameter:** a configuration parameter whose scope is the entire application. These
parameters are defined in the web.xml descriptor and accessed using PortletContext.getInitParameter().

**portlet initialization parameter:** a configuration parameter whose scope is the specific portlet for which it is
defined. These parameters are defined on a per portlet basis in the portlet.xml, and are accessed using
`PortletConfig.getInitParameter()`.

## <a name="2.6"></a>2.6 What's New in Portlet 2.0?

Portlet 2.0 introduces a variety of new features that impact the behavior and/or implementation of the bridge:

- events
- portlet served resources
- public render parameters
- portlet filters and wrappable request and response objects
- dispatch changes: ability to forward; ability to dispatch in all phases

### <a name="2.6.1"></a>2.6.1 Events

Portlet events provide a facility for a portlet to inform the consumer of changes that have occurred within it as a
result of user interactions and/or to be informed by the consumer of changes that have occurred elsewhere in the app
that may pertain to it. For example, when data is submitted to the portlet, the portlet returns an event indicating that
a value has changed which the consumer then forwards to another portlet that uses the event (data) to synchronize its
data. Likewise, an interaction in another portlet might cause that portlet to raise an event concerning a data change
that this portlet then synchronizes with.

The bridge considers a portlet event a model event. I.e. the event is targeted to the application's data model (not its
view). As JSF events primarily concern its view, the bridge processes the portlet events manually, however provisions
are made to make sure that any model changes that result from processing the event are updated in the view. Since event
payloads are arbitrarily complex, the manual processing of the data, though managed by the bridge, is left to the
(portlet) application to support.

### <a name="2.6.2"></a>2.6.2 Portlet Served Resources

In Portlet 1.0, resources could only be accessed as traditional (http) references, they couldn't be handled by the
portlet itself. This meant that resources couldn't be generated using portlet contextual information. Portlet 2.0
introduces a second type of resource request which encodes a reference to indicate it should be processed by calling the
portlet directly. Though there are a variety of limitations placed on portlets managing their own resources, including
not being able to modify any consumer managed state, this feature enables many portlet AJAX use cases. In JSF, client
(AJAX) processing is generally modeled as partial page requests. The JSF lifecycle runs exactly the same processing the
submitted data followed by rendering, however only the impacted portions of the view are processed/rendered.

The bridge deals with portlet served resources in one of two ways. If automatic resource dispatching is enabled and the
request is for a non-JSF resource the bridge handles the request by acquiring a request dispatcher and forwarding the
request to the named resource. If the request is for a JSF resource, the bridge runs the full JSF lifecycle ensuring
that data is processed and the resource (markup) is rendered.

### <a name="2.6.3"></a>2.6.3 Public Render Parameters

In addition to introducing the concept of events as a means for communicating/sharing context between a portlet and the
consumer (and thereby other portlets), Portlet 2.0 introduces a second facility called public render parameters. Regular
render parameters are opaque to the consumer and client. A public render parameter is a non-opaque render parameter.
This means the consumer is able to recognize the parameter in client requests and provide facilities for sharing the
value of this parameter between multiple portlets using the same public render parameter (or potentially where a mapping
between differing parameter names exist).

In a portlet that uses public render parameters, such parameters are passed on every request just like the opaque render
parameters. However, because the parameter is visible to the consumer, the value of public render parameter can change
in any given request on any given view of the portlet. This means on a given request be it an action, event, header,
render, or resource request a value might change. Because these parameters are view independent and can change at any
time, the bridge treats them much like it does events. They are values that get pushed directly into the data model
prior to running the Faces lifecycle to ensure the updated values are updated in the view. But whereas an event has an
arbitrary payload, a public render parameter can only be a string. This simplicity afford the bridge an opportunity to
directly participate in the pushing of the value into the data model. The bridge reads configuration data in the
`face-config.xml` to determine the mapping between any public render parameter name and the corresponding Faces EL that
references a managed bean accessor designated to get/set this parameter.

### <a name="2.6.4"></a>2.6.4 Portlet Filters and Wrappable Request/Response Objects

Portlet 2.0 adds the concept of a portlet filter. Just like a servlet filter, portlet filters execute in a chain before
the portlet receives the request and likewise has an opportunity to post process the response. The key difference in
this situation, however, is the bridge isn't a portlet whereas the `FacesServlet` is a servlet. When you use a servlet
filter with the `FacesServlet` one knows that if they are being called the request is being handled by Faces. In the
portlet case, however, all you know is that the request will be handled by the portlet which also relies on the bridge.
The simplest case where the portlet defers all requests to the bridge using filters isn't problematic. However, if a
portlet handles some of the requests directly while delegating only a subset of the requests to the bridge, doing work
in a filter at a minimum may an unneeded exercise and worst impact the portlet's processing of the request. The
recommendation to avoid filters and instead use the `FacesContextFactory` mechanism continues.

Along with portlet filters, Portlet 2.0 introduces wrappable request and response objects. These should be used wherever
there is a need to call `ExternalContext.setRequest` or `ExternalContext.setResponse`.

### <a name="2.6.5"></a>2.6.5 Dispatch Changes

In Portlet 1.0 one could only acquire a request dispatcher in the render phase. And the only supported operation on this
dispatcher was `include()`. In Portlet 2.0 a request dispatcher can be acquired on any phase though care must be taken
in such requests that don't return markup response. The operations have been expanded to both `include()` and
`forward()`. The bridge utilizes the ability to use `forward()` to implement `ExternalContext.dispatch()`. As this is a
change from its implementation in a Portlet 1.0 environment, developers should note that any markup prior to the
`forward()` will now be lost.