_Version: 5.0.0_

# 3. Bridge Interface

* * *

The `Bridge` interface is the main abstraction of the Portlet Bridge API. It defines the activation and invocation APIs
whereby a portlet delegates processing to Faces. The bridge's lifecycle is similar to the portlet's lifecycle. Before
executing requests, the bridge must be initialized and once the bridge becomes inactive it is destroyed. In a portlet
application each portlet using the bridge's services maintains a distinct bridge instance. Typically, the portlet
initializes the bridge in the portlet `init()` method and destroys it in the portlet `destroy()` method. However the
only requirements are:

- the portlet must initialize the bridge before having it process a portlet Faces request.
- that once initialized, the portlet must not reinitialize the bridge until after its current use has been destroyed.
- that once destroyed, a bridge must not be reused to process a portlet Faces request until it has been initialized
again.

## <a name="3.1"></a>3.1 Discovering and Instantiating the Bridge

The bridge is a pluggable component. The specific bridge implementation used by a portlet in a given deployment is
controlled by the portlet. `Bridge` implementations are required to have null constructors. A portlet instantiates the
designated bridge using the new operator. It is recommended that the portlet allow deployers the flexibility for
designating the specific bridge this portlet uses in the given deployment environment. See
[4.1](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.1_Configuration) for a description on the techniques used by the
`GenericFacesPortlet`.

A bridge must publish the specification name and version that it implements such that clients wishing to determine the
specification version implemented by the bridge can get it from the package version information of any class in the API
package (`javax.portlet.faces`):

    Class c = Class.forName("javax.portlet.faces.Bridge");
    String name = c.getPackage().getSpecificationTitle();
    String version = c.getPackage().getSpecificationVersion();

For this specification, the returned name must be "Portlet 3.0 Bridge for JavaServer Faces
2.2"<sup>[[3.1](tck-tests.md#3.1)]</sup>. Its version number must correspond to the version of this specification that
this bridge implements. The version number contains 2 places separated by a "." (e.g. 1.0). The first number signifies
the major version, the second number signifies the minor (maintenance) version.

## <a name="3.2"></a>3.2 Initializing the Bridge

A bridge is initialized by calling its init method:

    public void init(javax.portlet.PortletConfig config) throws BridgeException;

Once initialized, a bridge is bound to the portlet that initialized it until it has been released. I.e. an initialized
bridge can't be shared between differing portlets in the same application<sup>[[nt](tck-tests.md#NT)]</sup>.

The bridge initializes itself on the basis of application initialization parameters configured in the web.xml and
`PortletContext` attributes set by the calling portlet. The bridge recognizes the following application initialization
parameters:

    javax.portlet.faces.BRIDGE_REQUEST_SCOPE_ACTION_ENABLED
    javax.portlet.faces.BRIDGE_REQUEST_SCOPE_AJAX_ENABLED
    javax.portlet.faces.MAX_MANAGED_REQUEST_SCOPES
    javax.portlet.faces.RENDER_POLICY
    javax.faces.LIFECYCLE_ID

`BRIDGE_REQUEST_SCOPE_ACTION_ENABLED` is a boolean configuration parameter that specifies whether or not the bridge
request scope extends from an `ACTION_PHASE` to a subsequent `ACTION_PHASE`. The default value is `false`, meaning that
the bridge request scope begins in the `ACTION_PHASE` and extends to the
`RENDER_PHASE`<sup>[[5.8](tck-tests.md#5.8)]</sup>.

`BRIDGE_REQUEST_SCOPE_AJAX_ENABLED` is a boolean configuration parameter that specifies whether or not Ajax XHR requests
that invoke the `RESOURCE_PHASE` will participate in the bridge request scope created in a prior `ACTION_PHASE`. The
default value is `false`, meaning that the bridge request scope begins in the `RESOURCE_PHASE` and ends in the same
`RESOURCE_PHASE`<sup>[[5.66](tck-tests.md#5.66)]</sup>.

`MAX_MANAGED_REQUEST_SCOPES` is an integer valued configuration parameter that describes the maximum number of bridge
request scopes maintained by the bridge at any given time for all the portlets in this web
application<sup>[[nt](tck-tests.md#NT)]</sup>. If not set the bridge provides an implementation dependent default
maximum.

`LIFECYCLE_ID` is a String valued configuration parameter that describes the `ID` of the `Lifecycle` the bridge uses
when executing Faces requests<sup>[[3.6](tck-tests.md#3.6)]</sup>. If not set the bridge uses the ID for the default
lifecycle (`LifecycleFactory.DEFAULT_LIFECYCLE`)<sup>[[3.7](tck-tests.md#3.7)]</sup>.

In addition the portlet can impact a bridge's initialization by setting specific `PortletContext` attributes prior to
calling `init()`. Because `PortletContext` attributes are application wide, to carry initialization parameters on a per
portlet basis, the attribute name is encoded with the portlet name as described below.
 
The defined attributes are:

    javax.portlet.faces.[portlet name].excludedRequestAttributes
    javax.portlet.faces.[portlet name].preserveActionParams
    javax.portlet.faces.[portlet name].defaultViewIdMap
    javax.portlet.faces.[portlet name].bridgeEventHandler
    javax.portlet.faces.[portlet name].bridgePublicRenderParameterHandler
    javax.portlet.faces.[portlet name].defaultRenderKitId

where `[portlet name]` is the name of the portlet returned from a `PortletConfig.getPortletName()`.

`excludedRequestAttributes` is an attribute whose value is a `List` of `String` objects each of which either defines a
specific attribute name the bridge is to exclude from its managed request scope or defines a set of attributes the
bridge is to exclude from its managed request scope<sup>[[3.8](tck-tests.md#3.8)]</sup>. The later is identified by a
`String` value with the wildcard suffix ".\*". Such wildcard usage indicates the bridge is to exclude all those
attributes within the namespace identified by removing the "\*"<sup>[[3.9](tck-tests.md#3.9)]</sup>.

`preserveActionParams` is a `Boolean` valued attribute that when `TRUE` indicates the bridge must maintain the action's
request parameters for the duration of the bridge request scope<sup>[[3.10](tck-tests.md#3.10)]</sup>
[5.1.2](chapter-5-request-lifecycle.md#5.1.2). When this attribute isn't present or is `FALSE` the
action's request parameters are only maintained for the duration of the portlet request scope. The exception to this is
the `ResponseStateManager.VIEW_STATE_PARAM` parameter which is always maintained in the bridge request scope regardless
of this setting<sup>[[3.11](tck-tests.md#3.11)]</sup>.

`defaultViewIdMap` is a `Map<String, String>` valued attribute containing one entry per supported `PortletMode`. The
`Map` key is the `String` name of the `PortletMode`. The `Map` value is the default Faces `viewId` for the
mode<sup>[[3.12](tck-tests.md#3.12)]</sup>.

`bridgeEventHandler` is a (instanceof) `BridgeEventHandler` valued attribute identifying the instance that is called to
handle portlet events received by the bridge<sup>[[3.20](tck-tests.md#3.20)]</sup>.

`bridgePublicRenderParameterHandler` is a (instanceof) `BridgePublicRenderParameterHandler` valued attribute identifying
the instance that is called to postprocess incoming public render parameter changes after the bridge has pushed these
values into the mapped managed beans. This handler gives the portlet an opportunity to recompute and get into a new
consistent state after such changes<sup>[[3.20](tck-tests.md#3.20)]</sup>.

`defaultRenderKitId` is a String valued attribute identifying the renderkit id the bridge should encode as a request
parameter in each request to ensure that Faces will use this Id when resolving the renderkit used by this
portlet<sup>[[3.22](tck-tests.md#3.22)]</sup>. If this attribute doesn't exist, the bridge takes no action, leaving
the renderkit resolution to normal Faces resolution.

Non-standard attributes should follow a similar naming convention:  

**application wide attributes**: attributes should be named
`javax.portlet.faces.extension.`*[extension_pkg].[attribute name]*. Where *extension_pkg* is further namespacing
introduced by the extension authors to avoid collisions with other (types of) extensions.

**portlet specific attributes**: attributes should be named
`javax.portlet.faces.extension.`*[extension_pkg].[portlet name].[attribute name]* where *portlet name* is the name of
the portlet returned from a `PortletConfig.getPortletName()` call and *attribute name* is the name of the attribute.
Using *portlet name* ensures the bridge can locate the correct value on a per-portlet basis.

## <a name="3.3"></a>3.3 Destroying the Bridge

The bridge is destroyed by calling its destroy method:

    public void destroy();

When a portlet no longer needs the bridge's services, the portlet releases the bridge by calling the `destroy()` method.
Typically this is done in the portlet's own `destroy()` method. Once `destroy()` has been called, no further requests
can be processed through this bridge until a subsequent `init()` has occurred<sup>[[3.13](tck-tests.md#3.13)]</sup>.

This call performs no action if the bridge is in an uninitialized state<sup>[[3.14](tck-tests.md#3.14)]</sup>.

## <a name="3.4"></a>3.4 Request Processing

The bridge is used to execute Faces requests on behalf of the portlet by calling its `doFacesRequest` method:

    public void doFacesRequest(javax.portlet.ActionRequest request, javax.portlet.ActionResponse response)
            throws BridgeUnititializedException, BridgeDefaultViewNotSpecifiedException, BridgeException,
                NullPointerException;

    public void doFacesRequest(javax.portlet.RenderRequest request, javax.portlet.RenderResponse response)
            throws BridgeUnititializedException, BridgeDefaultViewNotSpecifiedException, BridgeException,
                NullPointerException;

    public void doFacesRequest(javax.portlet.ResourceRequest request, javax.portlet.ResourceResponse response)
            throws BridgeUninitializedException, BridgeException;

    public void doFacesRequest(javax.portlet.HeaderRequest request, javax.portlet.HeaderResponse response)
            throws BridgeDefaultViewNotSpecifiedException, BridgeUninitializedException, BridgeException;

    public void doFacesRequest(javax.portlet.EventRequest request, javax.portlet.EventResponse response)
            throws BridgeUninitializedException, BridgeException;

Portlets call the appropriate form of this method for each of the request phases in the portlet lifecycle. In Portlet
2.0/3.0 the lifecycle can be more complicated than in Portlet 1.0. I.e. a typical Java Portlet Specification 1.0 (JSR
168) portlet lifecycle invokes the portlet `processAction()` and `render()` methods which results in two calls to the
bridge's `doFacesRequest()`. The first processes the action request by passing the corresponding `ActionRequest` and
`ActionResponse` objects and the second the render request by passing the corresponding `RenderRequest` and
`RenderResponse` objects. Likewise, when a Java Portlet Specification 1.0 (JSR 168) portlet lifecycle only invokes
`render()` such as on the initial request or as a result of `renderURL` invocation, `doFacesRequest()` is only executed
once passing the corresponding `RenderRequest` and `RenderResponse` objects.

Though this lifecycle remains for Portlet 2.0/3.0, additional phases can occur/replace the Portlet 1.0 phases. Portlet
events are communications sent to a portlet by the consuming application to convey pertinent information when
interactions occur outside of this portlet. i.e. if a portlet action is the lifecycle phase executed when a user
directly interacts with the portlet, a portlet event is the lifecycle phase when an interaction outside of this portlet
causes the consumer to need to inform this portlet of the change. Because the portlet model calls for all events
(stemming from a client interaction) to be completed before rendering occurs and event processing can trigger new events
to be raised, a portlet can either receive the event as a side effect of it having raised an event during its own action
processing or in the more common form of the action being directed elsewhere.

Another new request lifecycle phase in Portlet 2.0/3.0 is the resource serving phase. Whereas in Portlet 1.0 resources
couldn't be directly served by the portlet but rather had to be referenced via direct http references, Portlet 2.0/3.0
allows a portlet to directly return dependent resources. One common use case for this new lifecycle is to implement
"rich client" behaviors using technologies such as `AJAX`. In this use case the resource is a portion of the portlet's
page markup which the client requests and inserts directly. Whether this or the more convention use case of acquiring a
dependent resource such as a javascript file or image, the resource phase can be thought of as an additional step that
is part of but after a render phase.

A new request lifecycle phase introduced in Portlet 3.0 is the header phase. Whereas in Portlet 1.0/2.0 the
`doFacesRequest(RenderRequest,RenderResponse)` was called in order to execute the Faces lifecycle and render a markup to
the response, in Portlet 3.0 the `doFacesRequest(HeaderRequest,HeaderResponse)` is called to execute the Faces lifecycle
and capture the rendered markup. The `doFacesRequest(RenderRequest,RenderResponse)` method is subsequently called in
order to write the captured markup to the response.

Each of the `doFacesRequest` lifecycle phase methods takes a portlet request and response object. In addition to the
incoming information in the portlet request, the portlet provides additional bridge request context by setting
attributes in the request using `PortletRequest.setAttribute()`. To direct the bridge to execute a specific Faces target
the portlet can set either of the following before calling `doFacesRequest`:

`javax.portlet.faces.viewId`: The value of this attribute identifies the Faces `viewId` the bridge must use for this
request (e.g. `/myFacesPage.jsp`). This is expected to be a valid Faces viewId though it may optionally contain a query
string<sup>[[3.15](tck-tests.md#3.15)]</sup>.

`javax.portlet.faces.viewPath`: The value of this attribute contains the the Faces `viewId` the bridge must use for this
request in `ContextPath` relative path form (e.g. `/faces/myFacesPage.jsp`). This value may optionally contain a query
string<sup>[[3.16](tck-tests.md#3.16)]</sup>.

The `BridgeUninitializedException` is thrown if this method is called while the bridge is in an uninitialized
state<sup>[[3.17](tck-tests.md#3.17)]</sup>. The `NullPointerException` is thrown if either the passed request or
response objects are null<sup>[[3.18](tck-tests.md#3.18)]</sup>.