_Version: 5.0.0_

# 4. GenericFacesPortlet

* * *

The portlet bridge isn't a portlet. It is a distinct subsystem a portlet acquires, instantiates, and executes when it
needs to handle requests that target Faces artifacts. Though the bridge has a simple API and relies on familiar
lifecycles and mechanisms, many portlets will find it more convenient to subclass an object that manages the details of
the bridge's execution than to manage the bridge directly. The `GenericFacesPortlet` is provided for this purpose.
Though a client of the bridge, `GenrericFacesPortlet` is included as part of the specification to provide an
out-of-the-box solution for portlet developers as well as to provide portlet developers a better appreciation of how and
how much work is involved in using the bridge.

## <a name="4.1"></a>4.1 Configuration

To provide flexibility, the `GenericFacesPortlet` recognizes the following application initialization parameters:

    javax.portlet.faces.BridgeClassName 
 
`BridgeClassName` specifies the name of the bridge class the `GenericFacesPortlet` uses to instantiate bridge instances
for all portlets in this web application. If not specified, the `GenericFacesPortlet` defaults to finding the class name
by looking for the context resource (file) called "`META-INF/services/javax.portlet.faces.Bridge`" and reading the first
line (excluding preceding and succeeding white space).

Because bridge implementations are expected to include such a context resource file in their jar file, portlet
applications relying on the `GenericFacesPortlet` typically do not set this initialization parameter. It is provided for
those environments where multiple such resource files exist (because there are multiple bridge implementations in the
environment) and resource resolution doesn't yield the desired class name.

**vvv BEGIN DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY vvv**

_Note: The following behavior has been deprecated as of JSR 378 and is disabled by default. These behavioral_
_requirements will be removed in the successor to JSR 378._

_Developers can specify the following `init-param` in the portlet.xml descriptor on a per-portlet basis in order to
enable legacy behavior:_

	<init-param>
		<name>javax.portlet.faces.initializeNamespacedContextAttributes</name>
		<value>true</value>
	</init-param>
		
In addition the `GenericFacesPortlet` reads the following portlet initialization parameters and either sets the
appropriate context attributes<sup>[[4.1](tck-tests.md#4.1)]</sup> to direct the bridge's execution:

    javax.portlet.faces.defaultViewId.[mode]
    javax.portlet.faces.excludedRequestAttributes
    javax.portlet.faces.preserveActionParams
    javax.portlet.faces.bridgeEventHandler
    javax.portlet.faces.bridgePublicRenderParameterHandler
    javax.portlet.faces.defaultRenderKitId

`javax.portlet.faces.defaultViewId.[mode]` specifies the name of the `defaultViewId` used for a named portlet
`PortletMode`. **Note**: *mode* is the `String` form of portlet `PortletMode`.

`javax.portlet.faces.excludedRequestAttributes` is a comma delimited list of attribute names the bridge is to exclude
from managing in the bridge request scope. The values in this list will either identify a specific attribute name to
exclude or a set of attributes. The later is identified by a String value with the wildcard suffix ".*". Such wildcard
usage indicates the bridge is to exclude all those attributes within the namespace identified by removing the "*",
non-recursive.

`javax.portlet.faces.preserveActionParams` is a boolean valued String that when true indicates the bridge must maintain
the action's request parameters for the duration of the bridge request scope
[5.1.2](chapter-5-request-lifecycle.md#5.1.2). When this initialization parameter isn't present or is
`false` the action's request parameters are only maintained for the duration of the portlet request scope. The exception
to this is the `ResponseStateManager.VIEW_STATE_PARAM` parameter which is always maintained in the bridge request scope
regardless of this setting.

`javax.portlet.faces.bridgeEventHandler` is a `String` naming the class that implements the
`javax.portlet.faces.BridgeEventHandler` interface that the bridge uses to process events. See section
[5.2.5](chapter-5-request-lifecycle.md#5.2.5) for detail concerning event support.

`javax.portlet.faces.bridgeRenderParameterHandler` is a `String` naming the class that implements the
`javax.portlet.faces.BridgePublicRenderParameterHandler` interface that the bridge calls after pushing mapped public
render parameters into beans. This handler gives the portlet an opportunity to recompute and get into a new consistent
state after such changes. See section [5.3](chapter-5-request-lifecycle.md#5.3) for detail concerning public render
parameter support.

`javax.portlet.faces.defaultRenderKitId` is a `String` defining this portlet's default renderkit Id. Providing a value
will cause the `GenericFacesPortlet` to configure the bridge to use this specific default renderkit Id for the portlet
rather than application level default (set in the `faces-config.xml`).

**^^^ END OF DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY ^^^**

In addition the `GenericFacesPortlet` reads the following portlet initialization parameter and either sets the
appropriate context attributes<sup>[[4.1](tck-tests.md#4.1)]</sup> to impact its own behavior:

    javax.portlet.faces.autoDispatchEvents

`javax.portlet.faces.autoDisptachEvents` is a boolean valued `String` defining whether the bridge overrides regular
portlet event processing dispatching all events to the bridge. If `true` the `GenericFacesPortlet` overrides
processEvent() and dispatches all events to the bridge. If `false` the `GenericFacesPortlet` delegates all event
processing to the standard portlet model. Use `true` if the portlet is written entirely in JSF. Use `false`, if your
portlet uses a mixture of view technologies. In the later case, the portlet is responsible for recognizing the events
which should be handled in JSF and dispatch them directly to the bridge. The default value is `true`. See section
[5.2.5](chapter-5-request-lifecycle.md#5.2.5) for detail concerning handling events.

There are two portlet initialization parameters that were recognized by the Portlet 1.0 bridge that are no longer
recognized and used in the Portlet 2.0 bridge:

    javax.portlet.faces.defaultContentType
    javax.portlet.faces.defaultCharacterSetEncoding

These parameters were used by the GenericFacesPortlet to preset the response content type before delegating to the
bridge to handle the request. Because the Portlet 2.0 bridge now uses dispatch.forward() to render Faces views that are
JSPs, this presetting is no longer needed. The requirement to recognize these init parameters no longer exists and their
presence is ignored.

## <a name="4.2"></a>4.2 Structure

The `GenericFacesPortlet` subclasses `javax.portlet.GenericPortlet`. It overrides the `init`, `destroy`, `doDispatch`,
`doEdit`, `doHelp`, `doView`, `processAction`, and `renderHeaders` methods.

**vvv BEGIN DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY vvv**

_Note: The following methods have been deprecated as of JSR 378 and will be pruned in the successor JSR._

In addition `GenericFacesPortlet` defines the following new methods:

    getDefaultViewIdMap
    getExcludedRequestAttributes
    isPreserveActionParameters
    getBridgeEventHandler
    getBridgePublicRenderParameterHandler

`getDefaultViewIdMap()` allows a subclass to override the `GenericFacesPortlet` mechanism for determining the `Map` of
the default `viewId` that should be used in each `PortletMode` when the request doesn't otherwise indicate a specific
view [4.2.7](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.7). This `Map` contains one entry per `PortletMode`. The entry key
is the name of the `PortletMode`. The entry value is the mode's default `viewId`.

`getExcludedRequestAttributes()` allows a subclass to override the `GenericFacesPortlet` mechanism for determining the
set of request attributes to exclude from the bridge request scope [4.2.8](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.8).

`getPreserveActionParameters()` allows a subclass to override the `GenericFacesPortlet` mechanism for determining
whether the bridge needs to preserve action parameters for subsequent renders
[4.2.9](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.9).

`getBridgeEventHandler()` allows a subclass to override the `GenericFacesPortlet` mechanism for determining the
`BridgeEventHandler` the bridge should use to process events [4.2.10](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.10).

`getBridgePublicRenderParameterHandler()` allows a subclass to override the `GenericFacesPortlet` mechanism for
determining the `BridgePublicRenderParameterHandler` the bridge should use to post process incoming public render
parameters [4.2.11](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.11).

`getDefaultRenderKitId()` allows a subclass to override the `GenericFacesPortlet` mechanism for determining the
renderkit Id (if any) the bridge conveys to Faces for use as the default renderkit Id when acquiring a `RenderKit` and
rendering [4.2.14](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.14).

**^^^ END OF DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY ^^^**

In addition `GenericFacesPortlet` defines the following new methods:

    isAutoDispatchEvents
    getBridgeClassName
    getFacesBridge

`isAutoDispatchEvents()` allows a subclass to override the `GenericFacesPortlet` mechanism for determining the setting
for the `autoDispatchEvents boolean` [4.2.12](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.12).

`getBridgeClassName()` allows a subclass to override the GenericFacesPortlet mechanism for determining which bridge
class to instantiate [4.2.6](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.6).

`getFacesBridge()` primarily used by a subclass to get the `GenericFacesPortlet`'s bridge in situations where the
subclass needs to directly call its `doFacesRequest` method. [4.2.13](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.13).

### <a name="4.2.1"></a>4.2.1 init():

The `GenericFacesPortlet` overrides the `init` method and does the following<sup>[[4.2](tck-tests.md#4.2)]</sup>:

- it determines the specific `Bridge` implementation class to use for this portlet by calling `getBridgeClassName()`.

**vvv BEGIN DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY vvv**

_Note: The following method calls are disabled by default since the methods are deprecated. See [Section 4.1](#4.1)_
_for instructions on how to enable the legacy behavior._

- it calls `getExcludedRequestAttributes()`. The result of this call is set as a `PortletContext` attribute as per this
specification [3.2](tck-tests.md#3.2).

- it calls `isPreserveActionParameters()`. The result of this call is set as a `PortletContext` attribute as per this
specification [3.2](tck-tests.md#3.2).

- it calls `getDefaultViewIdMap()`. The result of this call is set as a `PortletContext` attribute as per this
specification [3.2](tck-tests.md#3.2).

- it calls `getBridgeEventHandler()`. The result of this call, if not null, is set as a `PortletContext` attribute as
per this specification [3.2](tck-tests.md#3.2).

- it calls `getBridgePublicRenderParameterHandler()`. The result of this call, if not `null`, is set as a
`PortletContext` attribute as per this specification [3.2](tck-tests.md#3.2).

- it calls `getDefaultRenderKitId()`. The result of this call, if not null, is set as a `PortletContext` attribute as
per this specification [3.2](tck-tests.md#3.2).

**^^^ END OF DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY ^^^**

**Note**: instantiating and initializing the bridge may be deferred until it needs to dispatch the first request.

### <a name="4.2.2"></a>4.2.2 destroy():

The `GenericFacesPortlet` overrides the `destroy` method and does the following<sup>[[NT](tck-tests.md#NT)]</sup>:

- if it has activated a bridge, it calls the bridge's `destroy()` method.

- it resets its internal data members to an uninitialized state.

### <a name="4.2.3"></a>4.2.3 doDispatch():

The `GenericFacesPortlet` overrides the `doDispatch` method and does the following<sup>[[NT](tck-tests.md#NT)]</sup>:

- if the requested portlet `Mode` is `View`, `Help`, or `Edit`, it delegates to its superclass without doing any work.

- otherwise, for non-standard `Modes`, it processes the request as described in [section
4.2.5](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.2.5).

### <a name="4.2.4"></a>4.2.4 doView(), doEdit(), doHelp(), processAction(), serveResource(), processEvent(), renderHeaders():

The `GenericFacesPortlet` overrides the `doView()`, `doEdit()`, `doHelp()`, `processAction()`, `serveResource()`, and
`renderHeaders()` methods and executes the request via the bridge. I.e. portlets that want to override this behavior to
detect non-Faces targets should either provide this logic in `doDispatch()` or in a subclassed method of the above.

The `GenericFacesPortlet` overrides the `processEvents()` method and if `isAutoDispatchEvents()` returns `true` executes
this request via the bridge otherwise it delegates the handling of this event to its superclass. I.e. where the
subclassing portlet has first opportunity at overriding the above methods, in the case of events, the
`GenericFacesPortlet` typically has the first opportunity (assuming the portlet is using the preferred method of
annotating event methods).

### <a name="4.2.5"></a>4.2.5 Request Processing

When not overridden by a subclass, the `GenericFacesPortlet` processes the request by first determining if the target of
the request is a Faces or a non-Faces view. A non-Faces view target is recognized if automatic non-Faces view dispatching
is enabled and the request contains the parameter `_jsfBridgeNonFacesView`. The value of this parameter is the
`ContextPath` relative path to the non-Faces target. To handle this request the `GenericFacesPortlet` sets the response
contentType, if not already set, using the preferred contentType expressed by the portlet container. It then uses a
portlet `RequestDispatcher` to dispatch(include) the non-Faces target<sup>[[4.3](TCK-Tests.md#4.3)]</sup>. Automatic
non-Faces view dispatching is enabled if the portlet developer has specified the following init-param in the portlet.xml
descriptor:

    <init-param>
        <name>javax.portlet.faces.automaticNonFacesViewDispatching</name>
        <value>true</value>
    </init-param>

All other requests are assumed by the `GenericFacesPortlet` to be Faces requests and are executed by calling the bridge.
To facilitate navigations from non-Faces views to Faces views, the `GenericFacesPortlet` recognizes the request
parameters `_jsfBridgeViewId` and `_jsfBridgeViewPath`. Prior to executing the bridge, the `GenericFacesPortlet` must
check for both the `_jsfBridgeViewId` request parameter and the `_jsfBridgeViewPath` request parameter. If either the
`_jsfBridgeViewId` parameter exists or both parameters exist and the `_jsfBridgeViewId` parameter value is non-null, the
`GenericFacesPortlet` must set the value of the request attribute `javax.portlet.faces.viewId` to the value of the
`_jsfBridgeViewId` parameter<sup>[[4.4](tck-tests.md#4.4)]</sup>. If only the `_jsfBridgeViewPath` parameter exists
and contains a non-null value, the `GenericFacesPortlet` must set the value of the request attribute
`javax.portlet.faces.viewPath` to the value of the `_jsfBridgeViewPath` parameter<sup>[[4.5](tck-tests.md#4.5)]</sup>.
Otherwise the bridge is called without either of these attributes being set<sup>[[4.6](tck-tests.md#4.6)]</sup>.

### <a name="4.2.6"></a>4.2.6 getBridgeClassName()

The bridge calls this method during `init()`. `getBridgeClassName` returns the name of the class the
`GenericFacesPortlet` uses to instantiate the bridge. The default (`GenericFacesPortlet`) implementation returns the
value of the `javax.portlet.faces.BridgeClassName` `PortletContext` initialization parameter, if it exists. If it
doesn't exist, it calls `getResourceAsStream()` using the current thread's context class loader passing the resource
path "`META-INF/services/javax.portlet.faces.Bridge`". It returns the first line of this stream excluding leading and
trailing white space<sup>[[4.7](tck-tests.md#4.7)]</sup>. If it can not resolve a class name, it throws a
`PortletException`.

As noted [4.1](chapter-4-genericfacesportlet.md#4.1), bridge implementations are expected to include this resource
file in their implementation jar, hence the default behavior of the `GenericFacesPortlet` is to "discover" the
appropriate bridge implementation rather then relying on a specific web application configuration settings.

### <a name="4.2.7"></a>4.2.7 getDefaultViewIdMap()

**vvv BEGIN DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY vvv**

Unlike direct web access, in the portlet environment target `viewIds` aren't directly reflected in the request `URL`.
The bridge is responsible for mapping an incoming request to the correct target. In situations where the incoming
request doesn't contain specific bridge encoded target information it must map to a default. This default is provided by
the portlet in a `Map` containing an entry of defaults, one per supported `PortletMode`. During its `init()` processing,
the `GenericFacesPortlet` called `getDefaultViewIdMap()` to acquire this map which it then sets at a `PortletContext`
attribute [3.2](chapter-3-bridge-interface.md#3.2) for the bridge's use. The default (`GenericFacesPortlet`)
implementation of `getDefaultViewIdMap()` reads each portlet initialization parameter prefixed named
`javax.portlet.faces.defaultViewId.[mode]` where *mode* is the `String` form of a supported `PortletMode`. For each
entry it adds a Map entry with mode as the key value and the initialization parameter value as the map
value<sup>[[4.8](tck-tests.md#4.8)]</sup>.

For the bridge to work properly one entry per supported mode must be provided in the `Map`. If in later use, the bridge
can't find a needed entry, it throws the `BridgeDefaultViewNotSpecifiedException`.

**^^^ END OF DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY ^^^**

### <a name="4.2.8"></a>4.2.8 getExcludedRequestAttributes()

**vvv BEGIN DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY vvv**

As a portlet lifecycle allows multiple (re)renders to occur following an action, the bridge manages an extended notion
of a request scope to ensure that such rerenders produces identical results. Specifically, portlet scoped request
attributes are saved/restored by the bridge across such rerenders [5.1.2](chapter-5-request-lifecycle.md#5.1.2).
However, sometimes a portlet request scoped attribute truly must be removed when the request scope ends. The bridge uses
multiple mechanisms for determining which attributes are marked for exclusion from its managed scope. The portlet can
directly instruct the bridge to exclude attributes on a per portlet basis by setting a PortletContext attribute
[3.2](chapter-3-bridge-interface.md#3.2). This attribute's value is a `List` containing the excluded attribute names.

The `GenericFacesPortlet` sets this attribute based on the result of calling `getExcludedRequestAttributes()` in its
`init()` method. The default (`GenericFacesPortlet`) implementation for `getExcludedRequestAttributes()` returns a
`List` constructed by parsing the comma delimited `String` value from the corresponding portlet initialization
parameter, `javax.portlet.faces.excludedRequestAttributes`<sup>[[4.9](tck-tests.md#4.9)]</sup>. If this initialization
parameter isn't present `null` is returned which causes the `GenericFacesPortlet` to not set the corresponding
`PortletContext` attribute<sup>[[4.10](tck-tests.md#4.10)]</sup>.

**^^^ END OF DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY ^^^**

### <a name="4.2.9"></a>4.2.9 isPreserveActionParameters()

**vvv BEGIN DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY vvv**

By default the bridge doesn't preserve action parameters into subsequent renders. This can be overridden on a per
portlet basis by passing a value of true in the appropriate `PortletContext` attribute
[3.2](chapter-3-bridge-interface.md#3.2). To determine the setting for this attributes for this particular portlet,
the `GenericFacesPortlet` calls is`PreserveActionParameters()` in its `init()` method. The default
(`GenericFacesPortlet`) implementation returns the `boolean` value corresponding to the `String` value represented in
the portlet initialization parameter,
`javax.portlet.faces.preserveActionParams`<sup>[[4.11](tck-tests.md#4.11)]</sup>. If this initialization parameter
doesn't exist, `false` is returned<sup>[[4.12](tck-tests.md#4.12)]</sup>.

**^^^ END OF DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY ^^^**

### <a name="4.2.10"></a>4.2.10 getBridgeEventHandler()

**vvv BEGIN DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY vvv**

Because portlet events contain arbitrary (typed) payloads, event processing is delegated by the bridge back to the
portlet application. The configured `BridgeEventHandler` is called by the bridge at the appropriate point in the
lifecycle to allow the application to update the model state from information in the event. See
[5.2.5](chapter-5-request-lifecycle.md#5.2.5) for more details.

The specific `BridgeEventHandler` is conveyed to the bridge via a `PortletContext` attribute
[3.2](chapter-3-bridge-interface.md#3.2). The `GenericFacesPortlet` gets the instance it sets for this attribute by
calling `getBridgeEventHandler`. If not overridden, the `GenericFacesPortlet`'s default behavior is to read the portlet
initialization parameter `javax.portlet.faces.bridgeEventHandler` and return an instance of the class that corresponds
to its value<sup>[[4.15](tck-tests.md#4.15)]</sup>. If this initialization parameter doesn't exist, null is
returned<sup>[[4.16](tck-tests.md#4.16)]</sup>.

**^^^ END OF DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY ^^^**

### <a name="4.2.11"></a>4.2.11 getBridgePublicRenderParameterHandler()

**vvv BEGIN DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY vvv**

The bridge gives the portlet an opportunity to recompute and resynchronize its models after it has pushed new public
render parameter values into any corresponding mapped managed beans by calling the `BridgePublicRenderParameterHandler`
conveyed to it by the portlet via a `PortletContext` attribute [3.2](chapter-3-bridge-interface.md#3.2). See
[5.3](chapter-5-request-lifecycle.md#5.3) for more details. The `GenericFacesPortlet` gets the instance it sets for
this attribute by calling `getBridgePublicRenderParameterHandler`. If not overridden, the `GenericFacesPortlet`'s
default behavior is to read the portlet initialization parameter
`javax.portlet.faces.bridgePublicRenderParameterHandler` and return an instance of the class that corresponds to its
value<sup>[[4.17](tck-tests.md#4.17)]</sup>. If this initialization parameter doesn't exist, `null` is
returned<sup>[[4.18](tck-tests.md#4.18)]</sup>.

**^^^ END OF DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY ^^^**

### <a name="4.2.12"></a>4.2.12 isAutoDispatchEvents()

In general, the bridge is designed to defer to normal portlet processing to ensure it works well in a mixed use
environment. For example, action, header, render, and resource requests execute through the complete (`GenericPortlet`)
portlet call sequence before the `GenericFacesPortlet` dispatches the request to the bridge. This allows non-Faces
related requests to be handled directly by the portlet. Unfortunately, the portlet event model doesn't lend itself as
well to this delegation model. The portlet event model (via the `GenericPortlet`) encourages the use of method
annotation to mark the portlet's event handlers. The `GenericPortlet`'s `ProcessEvent()` method provides this behavior.
Given that the model also doesn't support marking an event as handled, the `GenericFacesPortlet` needs fore knowledge on
dispatching events to the bridge. The `autoDispatchEvents` boolean provides this information. If true, the
`GenericFacesPortlet` handles all events by dispatching them directly to the bridge. If false, the `GenericFacesPortlet`
doesn't handle any events directly, instead it delegates to the standard portlet model which is then responsible for
dispatching JSF related events directly via the bridge. If not overridden, the `GenericFacesPortlet`'s default behavior
for this method is to read the portlet initialization parameter `javax.portlet.faces.autoDispatchEvents`. If it exists
the value is interpreted as a boolean valued `String` (i.e. "true" is `true` while all other values are
`false`)<sup>[[4.19](tck-tests.md#4.19)]</sup>. If this initialization parameter doesn't exist, `true` is
returned<sup>[[4.20](tck-tests.md#4.20)]</sup>.

### <a name="4.2.13"></a>4.2.13 getFacesBridge()

The `GenericFacesPortlet` is designed to be self-servicing. However, there may be times, in particular when dealing with
events that aren't auto-dispatched, in which a subclass needs to dispatch a request directly to the bridge. To support
this the `GenericFacesPortlet`, via this method, returns a properly initialized and active bridge which a subclass can
use to call one of the `doFacesRequest()` methods<sup>[[4.21](tck-tests.md#4.21)]</sup>. The method is passed two
parameters, the `PortletRequest` and `PortletResponse`. The `GenericFacesPortlet` uses these to fully prepare the bridge
for a `doFacesRequest()` call.

### <a name="4.2.14"></a>4.2.14 getDefaultRenderKitId()

**vvv BEGIN DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY vvv**

The `RenderKit` Faces uses commonly resolves to the default set by the application. It is therefore application wide.
The default Id is resolved first by looking for a well known request parameter. If this parameter doesn't exist then the
default Id is taken from a configuration setting in the `faces-config.xml`. Finally, if no specific default Id is
configured an internal default is used. To allow a developer to differentiate the renderkits utilized by individual
portlets in an application, the `GenericFacesPortlet` calls this method during `init()` to acquire the specific default
renderkit Id it should configure for this portlet. If not overridden, the `GenericFacesPortlet`'s default behavior is to
return the value of the portlet initialization parameter
`javax.portlet.faces.defaultRenderKitId`<sup>[[4.22](tck-tests.md#4.22)]</sup>. If this initialization parameter
doesn't exist, `null` is returned<sup>[[4.23](tck-tests.md#4.23)]</sup>.

**^^^ END OF DEPRECATED FUNCTIONALITY ^^^**
